1. Select Your Operating System (OS):
   Choose an operating system that best suits your preferences and project requirements.
   Download and Install Windows 11. https://www.microsoft.com/software-download/windows11

Step 1: Check System Requirements Before you start the installation process, make sure your computer meets the system requirements for Windows 11. These requirements include a 64-bit processor, at least 4GB of RAM, 64GB of storage, and DirectX 12 compatible graphics.

Step 2: Backup Your Data It's always a good idea to backup your data before installing a new operating system. You can use an external hard drive, cloud storage, or a backup software to backup your important files and documents.

Step 3: Create Installation Media Download the Windows 11 installation media creation tool from the Microsoft website. Insert a USB drive with at least 8GB of storage, run the installation tool, and follow the on-screen instructions to create a bootable USB drive.

Step 4: Boot from USB Drive Restart your computer and boot from the USB drive. You may need to change the boot order in your computer's BIOS settings to prioritize the USB drive. Follow the on-screen instructions to start the Windows 11 installation process.

Step 5: Choose Language and Region Select your language, time, and currency format, and keyboard input method. Click "Next" to continue.

Step 6: Enter Product Key Enter your Windows 11 product key if prompted. If you don't have a product key, you can skip this step and activate Windows later.

Step 7: Select Installation Type Choose "Custom: Install Windows only (advanced)" to perform a clean installation of Windows 11. Select the drive where you want to install Windows and click "Next" to continue.

Step 8: Install Windows 11 Wait for the installation process to complete. Your computer will restart multiple times during the installation process. Follow the on-screen instructions to set up your user account, password, and privacy settings.

Step 9: Install Updates and Drivers Once Windows 11 is installed, make sure to install any available updates from Windows Update. You may also need to download and install drivers for your hardware components, such as graphics cards, sound cards, and network adapters.

Step 10: You have successfully installed Windows 11 on your computer. 



2. Install a Text Editor or Integrated Development Environment (IDE):
   Select and install a text editor or IDE suitable for your programming languages and workflow. Download and Install Visual Studio Code. https://code.visualstudio.com/Download

steps outlined below:

Visit the official Visual Studio Code website mentioned above.

Click on the "Download" button to download the installation file for your operating system either (Windows, macOS, or Linux).

Once the download is complete, open the installation file to begin the setup process.

Follow the on-screen instructions to install Visual Studio Code on your computer. You may be prompted to choose the installation directory and select any additional options during the installation process.

After the installation is complete, launch Visual Studio Code from the Start menu on Windows, the Applications folder on macOS, or the installed location on Linux.

Upon opening Visual Studio Code for the first time, you may be prompted to install extensions for specific programming languages or functionalities. You can browse and install extensions from the Visual Studio Code Marketplace by clicking on the Extensions icon on the sidebar.

Customize your settings and preferences in Visual Studio Code to tailor the editor to your needs. You can access settings by clicking on the gear icon in the lower-left corner or by pressing Ctrl+, on your keyboard.

Start coding in your preferred programming language by creating a new file or opening an existing project folder in Visual Studio Code. You can also explore the various features and functionalities of Visual Studio Code, such as debugging, version control, and integrated terminal, to enhance your coding experience.




3. Set Up Version Control System:
   Install Git and configure it on your local machine. Create a GitHub account for hosting your repositories. Initialize a Git repository for your project and make your first commit. https://github.com
   
Install Git:
Download and install Git according to your operating system.
Open a terminal or command prompt and verify that Git is installed by running git --version.
Configure Git:


 you can also set up other configurations such as setting up a default text editor.
Create a GitHub account:

Go to https://github.com/ and sign up for a free account if you don't already have one.
Once your account is created, you can create repositories to host your code.
Initialize a Git repository:

Navigate to the directory of your project on your local machine using the terminal or command prompt.
Initialize a Git repository by running git init. This will create a hidden .git directory in your project folder.
Make your first commit:

Add your files to the staging area using git add <file> or git add . to add all files.
Commit your changes to the local repository using git commit -m "Initial commit".
If you have set up a remote repository on GitHub, you can push your changes using git push origin master.



4. Install Necessary Programming Languages and Runtimes:
  Instal Python from http://wwww.python.org programming language required for your project and install their respective compilers, interpreters, or runtimes. Ensure you have the necessary tools to build and execute your code.

Python:

Download the latest version of Python from the official website 
Follow the installation instructions provided on the website for your specific operating system either (Windows, macOS, Linux)
Ensure that Python is added to your system PATH so that you can run Python from the command line

Download the SDK  from the official Oracle website
Install the SDK by following the installation instructions provided on the website for your specific operating system
Set the SDK environment variable to point to the SDK installation directory


5. Install Package Managers: If applicable, install package managers like pip (Python).

Install Python: Make sure you have Python installed on your system. You can download Python from the official website (https://www.python.org/downloads/) and follow the installation instructions.

Install pip: Pip is a package manager for Python that allows you to easily install and manage Python packages. To install pip, you can use the following command in your command line:

 
curl https://bootstrap.pypa.io/get-pip.py -o get-pip.py
python get-pip.py
This will download the pip installation script and run it using Python to install pip on your system.

Verify installation: After installing pip, you can verify that it is installed correctly by running the following command:
 
pip --version
This command will display the version of pip installed on your system.

Install packages: Once pip is installed, you can use it to install Python packages by running the following command:


6. Configure a Database (MySQL):
   Download and install MySQL database. https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/windows/installer/5.7.html 


Step 1: Download MySQL

Visit the official MySQL website at https://dev.mysql.com/downloads/ and download the latest version of the MySQL database server. Choose the appropriate version based on your operating system (e.g. Windows, macOS, Linux) and click on the download link.
Step 2: Install MySQL

Once the download is complete, run the installation file and follow the on-screen instructions to install MySQL on your computer. During the installation process, you will be prompted to set a root password for the MySQL server. Make sure to choose a strong password and remember it for future use.
Step 3: Start the MySQL server

After the installation is complete, start the MySQL server. Depending on your operating system, you can start the MySQL server using either the command line or through the MySQL Workbench interface. For example, on Windows, you can start the MySQL server by running the "mysqld" command in the Command Prompt.
Step 4: Access MySQL

Once the MySQL server is up and running, you can access it using the MySQL command-line client or through a graphical user interface such as MySQL Workbench. You can log in to the MySQL server using the root username and the password you set during the installation process.
Step 5: Create a new database

To create a new database in MySQL, use the following command in the MySQL command-line client or MySQL Workbench:
 
CREATE DATABASE database_name;


Step 6: Create tables and populate data


7. Set Up Development Environments and Virtualization (Optional):
   Consider using virtualization tools like Docker or virtual machines to isolate project dependencies and ensure consistent environments across different machines. 









8. Explore Extensions and Plugins:
   Explore available extensions, plugins, and add-ons for your chosen text editor or IDE to enhance functionality, such as syntax highlighting, linting, code formatting, and version control integration. 

extensions and plugins for text editors and IDEs include:

Visual Studio Code:

Prettier: Code formatting tool that helps maintain consistent code style.
ESLint: Linting tool for identifying and fixing JavaScript errors and best practices.
GitLens: Git version control integration for viewing and managing code changes.
Live Server: Automatically refreshes your browser when you save a file, great for web development.
Sublime Text:

Emmet: Toolkit for web developers that speeds up HTML and CSS coding.
SublimeLinter: Linting tool with support for various programming languages.
GitGutter: Shows Git changes in the gutter of the editor.
IntelliJ IDEA:

SonarLint: Code quality tool for Java and other languages.
Key Promoter X: Shows keyboard shortcuts for actions to help you learn them.
Rainbow Brackets: Colorizes nested brackets to make them easier to read.
Atom:

Atom Beautify: Code formatting tool for various languages.
Terminal Plus: Integrated terminal for running commands within Atom.
Git Plus: Git integration for managing version control directly from Atom.



9. Document Your Setup:
    Create a comprehensive document outlining the steps you've taken to set up your developer environment. Include any configurations, customizations, or troubleshooting steps encountered during the process. 
#Deliverables:
- Document detailing the setup process with step-by-step instructions and screenshots where necessary.
- A GitHub repository containing a sample project initialized with Git and any necessary configuration files (e.g., .gitignore).
- A reflection on the challenges faced during setup and strategies employed to overcome them. 

Setting up Windows 11, GitHub, and pip can be challenging at times due to various technical issues that may arise. During the setup process, I encountered a few challenges such as compatibility issues, installation errors, and unfamiliar interface navigation.

To overcome these challenges, I employed the following strategies:

Conducting thorough research: Before starting the setup process, I made sure to do thorough research on the recommended system requirements for Windows 11, GitHub, and pip. This helped me to avoid compatibility issues and ensure a smooth installation process.

Seeking help from online forums and communities: Whenever I encountered an error or issue during the setup process, I turned to online forums and communities for help. These platforms have a wealth of information and experienced users who can provide valuable insights and solutions to common setup problems.

Following step-by-step tutorials: To navigate through the setup process efficiently, I followed step-by-step tutorials provided by the official documentation of Windows 11, GitHub, and pip. These tutorials helped me to understand the setup requirements and procedures more effectively.


#Submission:
Submit your document and GitHub repository link through the designated platform or email to the instructor by the specified deadline.
